[applause] Hello and thank you very much. And uh I'm very excited to be here in London. I'm sure you could tell by my
accent that I'm not from here. I came from Florida where it's a lot warmer than here. Uh but I'm here to say
goodbye slop and welcome to Terminism. So before I get into it, I sort of want
to qualify what I'm talking about. I'm not just one of those people who goes on
Twitter or social media and says this model changes everything and you know just talk about AI like it's some fad.
I'm I'm living this day-to-day. I'm David Kpiano pretty much everywhere online and as was mentioned I have been
talking about state machines for a long time. I created this open source library called Xate which is a library for
making state machines and state charts and that was about 10 years ago. Uh five years ago I founded a company called
stately.ai where we allow you to make it easier to make state machines and I will
demonstrate a little bit of that later but I have been really really busy. So
over the last few months, I've been working on a new version of our stately editor, the next version of Xdates V6.
And to to give you give you an idea, Xate has been a part of many critical systems. It's very useful for complex
application logic. And if you live in the UK, then I can almost guarantee that
you've interacted with something that relies on XATE. I I'm not allowed to say
what that is, but you know, you can maybe guess. Uh also been working on a couple of other open source things like
XATE storev4. Um a graph library, an open-source completely free uh state
machine visualizer which you could check out at stately.scetch.ai, some other open source like with
Tanstack, a couple of large projects that I'm not allowed to talk about. And I'm doing all of this while helping my
wife take care of a three-month-old who uh is actually in the audience. So, if you hear a crying baby, then that's
either my son or Claude has gone down and someone is complaining about it. Um,
but yeah, needless to say, I'm tired. Never as tired as my wife, but definitely tired. And I thought that
having a baby was actually going to be, you know, not too bad. It's a tiny thing. How hard could it be? You know,
it's crying, you feed it, it eats. When it's fed, it sleeps. And honestly, for the first couple of days, it was
embarrassingly deterministic. This is all it was. But then we got home from the hospital, and we soon realized that
babies are a little bit more complicated than I realized. Uh, this is actually
something that got me really interested in state machines and state charts. not not having a baby but like 10 years ago
where there's this thing called state and transition explosion where when things get complex you see an explosion
of transitions and states everywhere and having a baby taught me about new types of explosions too I won't get into that
um there's also some unknown transitions where I'm crying along with a baby but
um yeah I I realized that babies are actually you know pretty non-deterministic like things are
getting harder and harder. I mean, we're at the three-month mark, so we'll we'll see what happens. But I wanted to define
determinism because I feel like we throw these terms around a lot. Uh determinism
in the simplest uh terms possible is given the same input, you have the same
output. So, conceptually, you could think about this like a pure function. It's not exactly a pure function because
of course this can be async but the idea is that whatever you give in you know
exactly what the result is going to be. Non-determinism is different.
Non-determinism means that given the exact same input you don't exactly know
what's going to come out. Now this doesn't mean that it's going to be completely random. It could be a fixed
set of choices and it it it's not exclusive to LLMs. uh I learned about
determinism and non-determinism through um you know finite state machines. We
have DFAS which is deterministic finite and NFAS which is non-deterministic
finite automa. And interestingly enough you could convert NFAs to DFAs. But what
happens is that the state machine gets a lot more complex. So you're paying for that complexity in structure. And so
that's where I got really interested in state charts because it sort of helps you contain and reduce that complexity
and makes it really visual so that you could describe things like Casio watches or microwaves or complex web apps or as
we're going to see soon AI agents as well. So you know AI agents have changed the
game. Um, and before AI, I was constantly working on a couple of side projects um that, you know, it would be
hard for me to finish them. But of course, AI came along and now I have 15 to 20 unfinished side projects. And as
you previously heard, going to a prototype is easy, but going to production is hard. And I think one of
the main reasons for this is that AI has actually made it a lot easier to skip
engineering and just go straight to, you know, let's prompt, let's see what comes
out and then let's just work with that. And so this is the practice that as I'm
going to talk about I I I sort of want to see eliminated. So my opinion in what
the best way to build with AI is is actually the same way that we should build without AI. So if we go back a few
years before LLMs came about, you know, the the the principles are the same. So
in my opinion, model thoughtfully. So think about what is the structure of my program? What are the what's the
vocabulary, the shared language that we should use? And how can we best represent the blueprints of the app
without building it first? Iterate sufficiently. So you know just going
back on the code and going from rough prototype to something that's a little bit more solid and realize what the gaps
are. Go back and keep iterating on it. And also make core logic explicit. This
is something that I've been talking about for many years and is also why I like state machines and state charts.
make it so that it's very clear and not scattered all over your codebase
because the root problem again in my opinion is I it's not vibe coding. It's
not AI is taking over everything. It's not even AI hallucinating. It's it
actually starts from us. It's unstructured delegation. It's when we decide, you know what, let's throw
everything over the wall and let's let the agents take care of judgment, take care of the structure and implementation
and sometimes even taste. I know, you know, some of you are guilty where it's like, I don't care how it looks, just
claude, make it look pretty. Um, codeex cannot be trusted to do that yet, but Claude's pretty good at it. Uh, and out
comes slop. But guess what? The slop works, so who cares? Spoiler alert, your
users care when the code slowly rots from the inside out and it takes longer
to maintain features or you have big security holes or things like that. So
yes, we do need to care and slop is not a new thing. It's not an AI exclusive
thing. I'm sure you've seen PRs like this before. Maybe not a million lines of code added, but you've seen PRs like
this. And what is your first instinct? Looks good to me, right? Like, okay, let's just skim through it. Let's accept
it. And all of a sudden, you know, bun is rewritten in Rust. And you have to just deal with that. And of course,
we're we're even dealing with this when we work with AI where it gives us this crazy bash command and you're like,
"Okay, yeah, go for it, dude. I don't I don't know what this does, but I'm sure it's fine and I'm definitely guilty of
this." So what is slop code exactly? In my
opinion, slop code is code without a reliable model. It is code that you can't fully understand. You can't fully
explain. It's code where you're not sure whether all of the edge cases are covered whether it works or not. It
might look like it works on the surface, but you cannot be entirely sure. So it
doesn't mean broken code. It might not even be bad code but uh slop code does
have a lot of properties like no clear domain boundaries. The invariants are
you know are not explicit. You can't really inspect the states and the behavior is scattered throughout the app
and there's really no safe way to change it. And like I was saying this stuff existed even before LLMs. So, um, you
know, but it works, right? And this is why we allow slop code to really
permeate throughout our codebase. Um, but the problem is that this this
stuff's addictive. It's like a a this is sort of a triple pun. It's a state machine, slot machine, slop machine.
And, um, yeah, we just keep pulling that lever. If the code isn't exactly what we want or the behavior is not exactly what
we want or it doesn't look exactly right, we just pull that lever again and we see, you know, maybe we could get a
bit of a better result. This is addicting and this is also what just, you know, makes the slop permeates
throughout our entire codebase and all of our projects. Now, you might be saying, well, isn't AI better than me at
coding? like it has all of the knowledge everywhere, so surely it's going to make better decisions than me. And I'm going
to argue that no, that's not exactly the case because LLMs weren't trained on good code. They were trained on all of
our code. And so what that means is it's going to repeat our patterns. It's going
to latch on to things that already exist in the codebase and it's just going to keep rolling with those things. So in
the industry there's really two ways that I'm seeing right now that um that
behavior and this structure is sort of represented basically where this source of truth lives. The first is markdown
files. We have things like skills. We have like claw.md agents.md
you know we have all of our plans in here. And markdown is just a natural language way of trying to describe
intent. Now a lot of people might argue that the code is a source of truth too
because of course this is where everything gets executed but I would say that code is a noisy source of truth
because sure we are encoding all of our intent but we're mixing it with just
architecture and boilerplate and just all sorts of different patterns. And it
turns out that probably 90% of our code has nothing to do with the behavioral
intents that we seek to uh to explain in our markdown. So this really points to
one hidden layer which is the central theme of this talk which is having an explicit model. So the difference is you
could think of this as a combination of intent and execution where a model is
structured. You can still have natural language in the model. The code can map
directly to the model and also everything that we intend to do in our app can map directly to the model as
well. And going to demonstrate that later. Um but yeah, so first let me
define what a model is. And I'm not talking about large language models. I'm talking about just modeling software. So
in my mind a model is an explicit representation of how the system should behave. And so this is why I like state
machines so much because um with state machines a a very common way of
describing the behavior is given when then statements. You might have heard of them as girkin or cucumber. Uh but you
could say given I'm in this state when this event happens then I'm in this state. And so again, those maps to map
to states, events, and transitions. And you could basically put that to a graph.
State machines though are not the only way to model software. And they're not the only aspect of software that you can
model. So logical flows, you could use state machines, BPMN, state charts, of course, flowcharts, even uh just simple
diagrams. You could also model your data. And you know, domain driven design
comes into play a lot here and I'm I'm sure Matt PCO will talk about that
later, but um it you know, these things are becoming more and more relevant.
Now, you might also be thinking if models matter so much and they're so
important to making good software, why doesn't AI tend to go for them? And the
answer is simple actually. It's because agents are very obedience, but they ironically don't have much agency. You
tell an agent, build the feature, it's going to pretty much go straight to code. Sure, it has a thinking loop. Um,
but when you're refining, you're working with that noisy artifact, that noisy source of truth. So, you're just having
the agent mess around in the code trying to iterate on it. However, if you do
have knowledge of saying, I know exactly how I want to model this, then the agent
will provide you that model. So, I'm not saying that you have to create these models from scratch. Instead, you could
have AI say, I'm going to help you create this model and using that model,
that shared understanding, we're going to work on the feature. And so when we need to make refinements and iterate on
it, we can update the model and then reference that model in the code. So we
still have this executable description of our codebase without all of the noise
of code. Now I see a lot of failure modes where uh where projects tend to exclude
models. One of them is oneshotting. And this is definitely popular in uh some of the earlier AI applications I've seen
where we think, okay, we could go straight from a prompt to the result. And I I I'll demonstrate uh basically
what the opposite of this is, but the truth is a lot of apps don't actually or
shouldn't work this way because iteration and human input is still important. Another one is pros control
flow. So for example, skills are really popular and skills are really useful for
saying this is important knowledge that you should have uh when you're working in the codebase. But if your skills say
you must do this, you should never do this, you uh only do this when this happens and then do step one, step two,
step three, then you're trying to represent control flow in natural language and you're you're really hoping
that the agent is going to follow it. And sometimes it won't also agents as as
the system. So sometimes we think throwing more agents at the problem is going to fix everything. And again
that's just asking for more chaos if we don't constrain the system. Uh there was
a talk about this later AI in AG Studio that I'm looking forward to which does talk about um basically uh multi- aent
approach and having a a structure for that or I I hope it does. I didn't see the talk yet. Neither did you. Um and
there's also entanglements of concerns. AI and agents are really good at just
getting the job done. They want the software to work and then it will say goal complete. And the result of this is
the same as if we um you know we go back to being junior developers and we're like okay forget about separation of
concerns, forget about organization. We're just going to mix everything together and if it works, it works.
Um, and one solution that we might think will fix all of this is just larger
context windows. But that's not always the case. Uh, more context does not mean
more structure. You can't just keep shoving instructions into context and telling it you must do this or you must
follow this workflow exactly. The context just gets noisier. And um, you
know, just because models can handle larger context doesn't mean that they're going to perform better. There's many
many studies on this. Uh, another problem is that if we keep doing this,
we have compounding slop. And so I've experienced this a lot where I would
just let the code run a muck and let the agents do whatever they want. The problem is that agents make assumptions.
They fill in the gaps with what they think is best. And some of those assumptions are going to be wrong. And
like AI cannot read your mind, so it's going to try to fill in the blanks. And these wrong assumptions are amplified
throughout your codebase. Again, AI is going to follow the existing patterns in
your codebase. And so that's just going to make the bad assumptions permeate and
even get worse. So I like to describe a missing model of the codebase as a
missing blueprint. Imagine that you're building a house and you decide, okay,
how do we start? Let's let's start with one wall. Okay, now we need to build a floor over here. Okay, there should
probably be a wall on this side. And then you keep going and going and you're like, okay, I think we have four walls.
So now let's try to put a roof on the thing. How do you think that house is going to look? And also, would you live
in that house? Probably not. It might eventually look good from the outside,
but structurally, you know, like this was not welld designed or designed at all. We were just building things until
it sort of looked right. So that's why a blueprint is so important. And um one
one common thing I've seen in react apps is like uh I I've given talks on use states where you know you would start
with just this pattern of using state for everything and then it sort of expands and then you get apps that look
like this and um again AI is just following the patterns that already exist in your codebase.
So what is the inversion? What is the solution to all of this? Uh Ken Wheeler
uh recently tweeted about this where he said agent-driven workflows with a sprinkling of deterministic tools are a
fool's errand. And I completely agree with this. He says to expect these deterministic workflows um to be a
sprinkling of AI instead of the other way around doing what they're actually
good at. I I saw another term in an article recently called deterministic core agentic shell which sort of mirrors
the um functional core imperative shell statement by Carrie Bernard and I I really like this and he actually called
me out in this article. He said you know you know if this wasn't enough to summon David Keith you know it definitely did
which is why I'm putting it on the screen but I really like that framing because I I'm starting to see two types
of apps now. One of them is LLMs that call programs. So basically, all of the
workflow logic lives in the LLM. We trust the agents to say, you know what, you'll routes and you'll probably do the
correct thing. You're super smart. We'll let you be the the traffic controller or
the air traffic controller or whatever. And this is risky. It's also a little
bit lazy. So I want to invert this and I want to encourage you to write programs
that instead call LLMs. Basically move the non-determinism to the edges and
move the determinism to the core. Because like I mentioned, a lot of apps
don't look like this or shouldn't look like this anymore. Instead, they require
these steps in the middle where we're iterating. And this is where non-determinism and this deterministic
structure fits because inside of that iteration step can be that structure
that those well-defined workflows where we have AI at the nodes at the edges. Um
Matt is actually going to talk about the software development life cycle later and uh I'm excited to see how he
incorporates that into into this flow. So this is all to say that AIdriven apps
are getting more complex and we do need that structure. Now I know that some of you might argue
that you know some of this might seem like too much ceremony but I will argue that modeling is not ceremony when it
replaces confusion. So this means that you don't have to model absolutely everything in your app formally really
only the confusing parts. Um, and I think this is where it's most useful. And also AI is really good at helping
you model things as well. So you don't have to physically write every single line out yourself. Um, we've seen this a
lot with uh with rough prototyping when we're doing UX. You start with something rough and then you just keep iterating
on that until it actually looks good. You don't have to make everything a very
formalized specification at the beginning. So start rough and then
iterate on it. Um like I mentioned earlier, I've been working on the next version of the uh
stately editor and it does have some AI parts. Uh but it's also one of the most complex apps that um you know that me
and a bunch of others have worked on. And um yeah, so I I have a lot of battle
scars here and I know that uh because we have a structure um I'll just breeze
through this real quick, but because we have a structure where the core logic is represented in our case with state
machines, it makes it really easy to let AI uh actually help with feature
developments because AI is not going to mix concerns or do anything like that.
AI has a clear picture of what the core logic is and how it interacts with the
different parts of our app. So, um, one of the engineering practices that I think is still relevant to this day is
separation of concerns because AI will, you know, prevent slopping up your
codebase and making a mess of it if your concerns are explicit and um, and well
separated. Now I talk about state machines a lot but I will say that you don't
necessarily need state machines. The important thing is that you need structure. Uh there's there's another
talk about this later that I'm excited about where agents work well in structure. So you're not only helping
yourself but you're helping agents as well. And uh while I have a few minutes I want to show you just really a quick
demo of what exactly I'm talking about. So, let's say that you are tasked with
creating an AI app that has to draft emails. And so, you would give it a
prompt and the prompt would be, okay, I want to make an email about something.
And typically, if we were going back a few years, we would just have the LLM take that prompt and spit out an email.
But nowadays, the requirements, the the bar is higher because we might want that
email to be refined. we might want to make sure that that email is uh factually accurate and good to go and
that nothing is missing. So this app becomes a little bit more complex. And so what I did uh was I used XATE and uh
I basically formulated this as a state machine so that we could say first work
on the draft or sorry first work on requirements. see that we have all of the information and then once we have
everything create a draft and then iterate on that draft with the user and then when we're happy with it send it.
So instead of throwing this all to AI I'm using a state machine um and basically I'm having that formal model
help me structure this workflow flow out. So, for example, if I have a draft request of, and I'm actually going to
show you the state machine here, but if I have a draft request of um talk or
find me after my talk, that's very vague. And so, it's actually going to
navigate through the states and it's saying, hey, I need to know who the recipient is or what the subject is. So,
um I'll add details. It's youample.com and it's my talk on
determinism. So, it's going to be evaluating again. And I I think that's enough detail. So,
we're going to go and draft anyway. And then it's going to draft an email.
And then, uh, this looks really formal, so I'm just going to say, "My name is David." Make it less formal.
And then it's going to draft again. I'm thankful that the internet works here. And let's see. This looks good. We
have all of my information. So, I'm just going to go ahead and send it.
And so, the biggest difference between this and your typical AI app is that we
have a formal structure and a highly visual one too for how the agent works.
And so we're not putting the agent in every single part of this workflow. The
non-deterministic parts are the fuzzy parts like is the email missing anything or even drafting the email something
that we cannot express fully in code. And the deterministic parts ensure that
we're at the right state at the right time. So it's it should be impossible to send the email without approving a draft
and it should be impossible to uh create a draft without having all the
requirements satisfied. And this is pretty simple again you
don't need a state machine specifically. The important thing is that you are keeping what should be explicit and
deterministic in a as the core of your entire application and then at the edges using
LLMs to actually execute and to do the fuzzy non-deterministic things and then
you just continue the loop and um honestly this structure works for most things. If you wanted to create your own
cursor then it's exactly this type of while loop as well.
So, how do we transition to determinism? What I want you to do, maybe not today,
maybe tomorrow or next week, look at your existing applications, pick one
confusing workflow in there, could just be one, and model it explicitly. Think
about how can you organize this to make more sense. Now, this might look like decoupling UI from the core logic, or
maybe you have a workflow where you're just handing everything off to an AI agent instead of having that codified in
your actual code. And uh there's many ways you could do this, but the guiding
principles I like to do is ask yourself what can be deterministic in there. So,
don't let your AI agent do non-determinist or do deterministic things. Where is iteration useful? So,
what parts of it can we actually use a human in the loop um to help refine the
results? And of course, where can the logic be separate from the UI, which is
good advice whether you're working with AI or without AI. So, in short,
non-determinism should be at the edges of your AI applications and determinism
should be at the core. So, we should prevent doing the things that we've been doing before. oneshotting, putting
control flow in natural language, letting agents and sub aents run a muck
and mixing concerns and making our code base messier. So, going back to uh my my baby, our
son, um things are getting more and more non-deterministic. However, we've had lots of help from friends, family,
books, lots of resources, and that provides a model for understanding what
do we do next? What do we do when um when our baby reaches four months, when the baby gets older? It doesn't make the
complexity go away. It provides a framework so that the complexity of dealing with a baby is survivable. And
your codebase is your baby or at least your company's baby. I don't know how you feel about your codebase, but the
the the model is not just, you know, to to be this random artifact. The model is
for future you. The model is for your team and the model is especially for your agents so that it could stop
producing slop and actually produce good code. And I believe that the model is
how collaboration survives the speed like these 10x speeds that we're getting
by building with AI. So in short, the best practices didn't change. AI of
course made it easier for us to forget about the best practices, but I really
feel like the best practices have become more important now than ever. So, thank
you so much, London, for having me.
